skills/validate/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: validate
description: "Verify the built product by walking through every acceptance scenario in the browser. Takes screenshots as evidence. Presents Gate 3."
---

# Validate Skill

## ⚠️ LANGUAGE: Evidence checklist in ENGLISH. Gate 3 presentation to operator in PORTUGUESE.

## What this skill does

ONE thing: verify that the built product works by testing every scenario in a real browser.

- **Input:** clean code (output of `review` skill) + `.pi/specs/<feature>/spec.md`
- **Output:** verified product + screenshots + evidence checklist

## Prerequisites

- `agent-browser` must be installed (`npm install -g agent-browser` or available as pi skill)
- Code must have passed `test` and `review` skills

## Process

### Step 1: Start the app

**For static HTML/JS apps (no server needed):**
```bash
agent-browser open "file:///absolute/path/to/index.html"
```

**For apps that require a server:**
```bash
# Start server in background
nohup node server.js > /dev/null 2>&1 & disown
sleep 2
# Verify it's up
curl -s http://localhost:4321 | head -5
# Open in browser
agent-browser open http://localhost:4321
```

**NEVER combine server start + browser open in one command.**

### Step 2: Set viewport

```bash
agent-browser set viewport 1440 900
```

Take an initial screenshot of the landing state:
```bash
agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-initial.png
```

### Step 3: Walk through EVERY acceptance scenario

Read `.pi/specs/<feature>/spec.md`. For EACH scenario:

1. **Interact:** Use agent-browser to perform the actions described in the scenario
   ```bash
   agent-browser snapshot -i          # See interactive elements
   agent-browser click @e1            # Click buttons
   agent-browser fill @e2 "text"      # Fill inputs
   agent-browser wait --text "Success" # Wait for expected result
   ```

2. **Verify:** Check that the expected behavior occurred
   ```bash
   agent-browser get text @e1         # Check text content
   agent-browser is visible @e1       # Check visibility
   agent-browser snapshot -i          # See current state
   ```

3. **Screenshot:** Capture evidence
   ```bash
   agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-scenario-N.png
   ```

4. **Record:** Mark as PASS or FAIL

### Step 4: Test responsive (if product has visual interface)

```bash
agent-browser set viewport 375 812    # Mobile
agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-mobile.png

agent-browser set viewport 768 1024   # Tablet
agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-tablet.png

agent-browser set viewport 1440 900   # Desktop (restore)
```

### Step 5: Cleanup

```bash
agent-browser close
# If server was started:
pkill -f "node server.js" 2>/dev/null || true
```

### Step 6: Evaluate results

**If ALL scenarios PASS:**
- Proceed to Gate 3

**If ANY scenario FAILS:**
- Do NOT present Gate 3
- Update `workflow-state.json` for the code quality loop:
  1. Increment `codeLoop.cycle` by 1
  2. Set `codeLoop.lastFailedScenario` to the scenario description that failed
  3. Check: if `codeLoop.cycle > codeLoop.maxCycles` → escalate to operator (see Escalation below). Stop here.
  4. Launch the `scout` agent (via pi-subagents) to diagnose root cause and map to a plan task
  5. Set `codeLoop.lastDiagnosis` to the scout's root cause description
  6. Set `codeLoop.lastReentryTask` to the mapped task (or `null` if systemic)
  7. Set `currentPhase: "build"` — this triggers the product-loop extension, which detects surgical fix mode from `codeLoop.lastFailedScenario` and sends targeted build instructions
- The code quality loop then runs automatically:
  - `build` fixes ONLY the mapped task (surgical fix)
  - `test` runs ALL tests (may have regressions)
  - `review` runs on ALL code
  - `validate` runs ALL scenarios again (you'll re-enter this skill)
  - Max 3 cycles total (tracked by `codeLoop.cycle`)

### Step 7: Present Gate 3 (in Portuguese)

Build a checklist from the scenario results:

"Verifiquei tudo e está funcionando! 🎉

**O que testei:**
☑️ [Scenario 1 — in product language]
☑️ [Scenario 2]
☑️ [Scenario N]

**Screenshots:** [list of screenshot paths or inline display]

Você pode testar em: [URL or localhost instruction]"

Then use the `ask` tool:

```
questions: [{
  id: "gate3",
  question: "Tudo funcionando como esperado?",
  options: [
    { label: "Tudo certo, pode publicar!" },
    { label: "Preciso de ajustes (vou descrever)" },
    { label: "Não é isso, precisa repensar" }
  ],
  recommended: 0
}]
```

### Gate 3 feedback paths

- **"Tudo certo, pode publicar!"** → Update `workflow-state.json`: set `gates.releaseApproved: true`, `currentPhase: "publish"`. Proceed to `publish` skill.
- **"Preciso de ajustes"** → Record feedback. Return to `build` phase for the specific adjustment. Do NOT redo Gate 2.
- **"Não é isso, precisa repensar"** → Record feedback. Return to `discovery` phase. Reset gates.

## Code quality loop escalation (after 3 cycles)

```
questions: [{
  id: "code-escalation",
  question: "[Descrição do cenário que falhou] não está funcionando depois de 3 tentativas. O que prefere?",
  options: [
    { label: "Entregar sem essa funcionalidade por agora" },
    { label: "Tentar de novo com uma abordagem diferente" },
    { label: "Voltar ao planejamento e repensar como fazer" }
  ]
}]
```

The message ALWAYS describes the consequence for the user, never the technical problem.

## Rules

- **MANDATORY:** At least 1 screenshot per scenario. No screenshot = no Gate 3.
- Use `agent-browser`, NOT `surf`. agent-browser is self-contained (Playwright, headless).
- Walk through EVERY scenario, not just the happy path.
- Screenshots should show the RESULT of the action, not just the initial state.
- Do NOT use the `interview` tool. Use `ask` tool for Gate 3 only.

Commit message:

fix: validate and build skills — always use HTTP server, never file://
ES modules do not work with file:// protocol due to CORS policy. This
caused the agent to waste time debugging in BOTH test features (propostas
and dashboard). The validate skill now explicitly requires npx serve or
equivalent HTTP server for all apps, with python3 as fallback.

Build skill also updated: visual verification deferred to validate phase,
file:// explicitly warned against.

skills/validate/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: validate
description: "Verify the built product by walking through every acceptance scenario in the browser. Takes screenshots as evidence. Presents Gate 3."
---

# Validate Skill

## ⚠️ LANGUAGE: Evidence checklist in ENGLISH. Gate 3 presentation to operator in PORTUGUESE.

## What this skill does

ONE thing: verify that the built product works by testing every scenario in a real browser.

- **Input:** clean code (output of `review` skill) + `.pi/specs/<feature>/spec.md`
- **Output:** verified product + screenshots + evidence checklist

## Prerequisites

- `agent-browser` must be installed (`npm install -g agent-browser` or available as pi skill)
- Code must have passed `test` and `review` skills

## Process

### Step 1: Start the app

**⚠️ ALWAYS use an HTTP server.** The `file://` protocol does NOT work with ES modules (CORS policy blocks module imports). Even for "static" HTML/JS apps, serve via HTTP.

**For static HTML/JS/CSS apps:**
```bash
# Start a simple HTTP server in background
npx -y serve -l 4321 &>/dev/null & disown
sleep 2
# Verify it's up
curl -s http://localhost:4321 | head -5
# Open in browser
agent-browser open http://localhost:4321
```

**For apps with a custom server (Node, Python, etc.):**
```bash
# Start server in background
nohup node server.js > /dev/null 2>&1 & disown
sleep 2
# Verify it's up
curl -s http://localhost:4321 | head -5
# Open in browser
agent-browser open http://localhost:4321
```

**NEVER combine server start + browser open in one command.**

**If `npx serve` hangs or the port is occupied:**
```bash
# Check if port is in use
lsof -i :4321
# Kill existing process
kill $(lsof -ti :4321) 2>/dev/null
# Try python as fallback
python3 -m http.server 4321 --directory . &>/dev/null & disown
```

### Step 2: Set viewport

```bash
agent-browser set viewport 1440 900
```

Take an initial screenshot of the landing state:
```bash
agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-initial.png
```

### Step 3: Walk through EVERY acceptance scenario

Read `.pi/specs/<feature>/spec.md`. For EACH scenario:

1. **Interact:** Use agent-browser to perform the actions described in the scenario
   ```bash
   agent-browser snapshot -i          # See interactive elements
   agent-browser click @e1            # Click buttons
   agent-browser fill @e2 "text"      # Fill inputs
   agent-browser wait --text "Success" # Wait for expected result
   ```

2. **Verify:** Check that the expected behavior occurred
   ```bash
   agent-browser get text @e1         # Check text content
   agent-browser is visible @e1       # Check visibility
   agent-browser snapshot -i          # See current state
   ```

3. **Screenshot:** Capture evidence
   ```bash
   agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-scenario-N.png
   ```

4. **Record:** Mark as PASS or FAIL

### Step 4: Test responsive (if product has visual interface)

```bash
agent-browser set viewport 375 812    # Mobile
agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-mobile.png

agent-browser set viewport 768 1024   # Tablet
agent-browser screenshot /tmp/validate-tablet.png

agent-browser set viewport 1440 900   # Desktop (restore)
```

### Step 5: Cleanup

```bash
agent-browser close
# If server was started:
pkill -f "node server.js" 2>/dev/null || true
```

### Step 6: Evaluate results

**If ALL scenarios PASS:**
- Proceed to Gate 3

**If ANY scenario FAILS:**
- Do NOT present Gate 3
- Update `workflow-state.json` for the code quality loop:
  1. Increment `codeLoop.cycle` by 1
  2. Set `codeLoop.lastFailedScenario` to the scenario description that failed
  3. Check: if `codeLoop.cycle > codeLoop.maxCycles` → escalate to operator (see Escalation below). Stop here.
  4. Launch the `scout` agent (via pi-subagents) to diagnose root cause and map to a plan task
  5. Set `codeLoop.lastDiagnosis` to the scout's root cause description
  6. Set `codeLoop.lastReentryTask` to the mapped task (or `null` if systemic)
  7. Set `currentPhase: "build"` — this triggers the product-loop extension, which detects surgical fix mode from `codeLoop.lastFailedScenario` and sends targeted build instructions
- The code quality loop then runs automatically:
  - `build` fixes ONLY the mapped task (surgical fix)
  - `test` runs ALL tests (may have regressions)
  - `review` runs on ALL code
  - `validate` runs ALL scenarios again (you'll re-enter this skill)
  - Max 3 cycles total (tracked by `codeLoop.cycle`)

### Step 7: Present Gate 3 (in Portuguese)

Build a checklist from the scenario results:

"Verifiquei tudo e está funcionando! 🎉

**O que testei:**
☑️ [Scenario 1 — in product language]
☑️ [Scenario 2]
☑️ [Scenario N]

**Screenshots:** [list of screenshot paths or inline display]

Você pode testar em: [URL or localhost instruction]"

Then use the `ask` tool:

```
questions: [{
  id: "gate3",
  question: "Tudo funcionando como esperado?",
  options: [
    { label: "Tudo certo, pode publicar!" },
    { label: "Preciso de ajustes (vou descrever)" },
    { label: "Não é isso, precisa repensar" }
  ],
  recommended: 0
}]
```

### Gate 3 feedback paths

- **"Tudo certo, pode publicar!"** → Update `workflow-state.json`: set `gates.releaseApproved: true`, `currentPhase: "publish"`. Proceed to `publish` skill.
- **"Preciso de ajustes"** → Record feedback. Return to `build` phase for the specific adjustment. Do NOT redo Gate 2.
- **"Não é isso, precisa repensar"** → Record feedback. Return to `discovery` phase. Reset gates.

## Code quality loop escalation (after 3 cycles)

```
questions: [{
  id: "code-escalation",
  question: "[Descrição do cenário que falhou] não está funcionando depois de 3 tentativas. O que prefere?",
  options: [
    { label: "Entregar sem essa funcionalidade por agora" },
    { label: "Tentar de novo com uma abordagem diferente" },
    { label: "Voltar ao planejamento e repensar como fazer" }
  ]
}]
```

The message ALWAYS describes the consequence for the user, never the technical problem.

## Rules

- **MANDATORY:** At least 1 screenshot per scenario. No screenshot = no Gate 3.
- Use `agent-browser`, NOT `surf`. agent-browser is self-contained (Playwright, headless).
- Walk through EVERY scenario, not just the happy path.
- Screenshots should show the RESULT of the action, not just the initial state.
- Do NOT use the `interview` tool. Use `ask` tool for Gate 3 only.
